Now we've opened up QGIS and
we've had some time to get used
to the controls navigating
around our map frame.
Let's take a look at how this
software is laid out.
And so QGIS is split into some
main panels.
We have the browser panel here
on the left and underneath we've
got the layer list and then at
the top we have our menu bar and
our toolbars and then our map is
within our map frame.
And last of all at the bottom we
have our status bar.
So let's take a look at the menu
and toolbars to begin with.
The toolbar is where we have
quick buttons for accessing the
tools to work with our data
layers.
The buttons here are actually
changeable, so we can right
click on the toolbar here and
then we can change what panels
or toolbars we have turned on.
So the panels are the other
windows that we can see.
So our layers list for example,
we could turn that off and then
we can see that it's disappeared
here on the left.
So we just right click again up
here.
We can turn that back on and
then the toolbars, these are all
the tools that we have within
our toolbar.
So we can turn these on and off
as well.
So for example, the map
navigation toolbar, these are
the buttons here that we've been
using to navigate around our
map.
We could turn this toolbar off
and then we can see that those
buttons disappear.
We have a menu tab at the top of
the tool boxes here and we have
lots of different tabs which we
can click on and have a drop
down of choices for things to do
within that category.
We'll take a look at project to
start with.
So this is similar to project
within ArcGIS Pro if you're
familiar with that software, or
it's pretty similar to file
within Microsoft programs.
So in here we could start a new
project, open an existing one.
We've got our Save and Save As
options.
We also have more options in
here like accessing our project
properties, exporting our map or
project, and creating a new
print layout.
Now let's look at the Edit tab.
So Edit is also similar to the
Edit tab in Arcgis Pro.
This is where we can edit our
data layers once we've added
some data into our project.
We have copy and paste functions
here.
We've got buttons to add, move
or delete features and we have
some other feature editing tools
as well in here.
In the View tab, we have some of
the same map navigation buttons
we've been using.
So the Pan map and also Zoom In
and zoom out options.
We have some measure tools in
here as well, and we also can
add decorations to our map so
these are like grid lines or
scale bars that we can add to
our map frame.
This isn't where we would go to
add these elements on a map that
we're preparing to export or
print though.
You would need to create a print
layout to do that.
We'll go over how to do this
within another video tutorial
within this course. And in view,
we can also create a spatial
bookmark.
So this is where we can save a
view within our map.
So for example, if we were
focusing on Italy, we could zoom
in on Italy here and have it
centred within our map.
And we want to save this view
because we want to go back to
it.
So to do that we can go back
into view, click on new spatial
bookmark and name it.
So we'll just name it Italy and
then we can choose whether we
want to save it into user
bookmarks.
So this will save it into QGIS
to use in every project that we
work in, or we could also save
it in Project Bookmark.
So this will save it for just
your current project to be able
to access that view.
So we'll just save it into our
project bookmarks and then click
save.
And then if we take a look in
our browser window on the left,
we can see we have a tab here
for Spatial Bookmarks.
So we can click on the arrow to
open it up.
And then if we go into Project
Bookmarks, here is our Italy
bookmark that we've created.
So if we were to end up in a
different place in our map and
we wanted to go back to the view
that we saved, we just need to
click on this in our browser and
it takes us back to this view
that we had of Italy.
So pause this video here and
have a go at saving your own
bookmark for any country or
location of your choice.
In view, we also have options
for showing or hiding layers,
and we can also turn our panels
or toolbars on and off in here
as well.
And next we'll take a look at
the Layer tab.
So in layer we have the Data
Source Manager where we can have
access for opening all of our
file based data, our databases
and our web services.
We can use Layer to also add and
create data layers here.
We have options for copying and
pasting data layers, and we can
open our attribute table for our
layers and also look at layer
properties here which we'll be
going over later on in this
course. Looking at settings, we
have Style Manager here and this
is where we can manage and
create styles for the symbols
that represent our data layers.
We can also create custom
projections in here and we have
options for setting keyboard
shortcuts.
In the options window we can
choose specific preferences for
how we want our QGIS platform to
look and run.
We've already taken a look at
Plug Insurance, so this is where
we can manage and install
external software for QGIS.
And Python Console allows us to
run script.
The Vector tab has all of our
tools for our vector data layers
and we have all the options here
for vector data and in raster
it's the same but for our raster
data layers. We have the
database tab which has our
database manager in where we can
add and manage our geodatabases
and then in web we can see our
plugins.
In Mesh, we can perform mesh
layer calculations and in
processing we have our toolbox.
So this is where we can access
all of our geoprocessing tools
that we might need within our
projects.
The help tab is pretty
self-explanatory.
We have the help contents in
here which takes us to an online
QGIS help page and underneath
our menu we have all of our
toolbars and as I said, this is
customizable to whatever tools
that you want to have quick
access to.
Next we'll take a look at the
browser panel on the left.
So in here this is where we can
navigate to our connected
directories and folders and we
can use this to add data into
our map frame and also to
connect to geodatabases.
We have the layers list
underneath and so this is where
we can see all of our data
layers that we have within our
project.
At the moment we can only see
our basemap because this is the
only thing we have in our
project.
But once we add some more data
in, it will come up within the
the layers list here.
We can right click on the data
layers within here and then we
can see a menu with extra
options particular for that
layer.
The next panel to mention is the
map canvas.
This is straightforward.
So this is where we see our data
displayed and we can navigate,
zoom and interact with it here.
And the last thing to mention is
the status bar at the bottom.
So this shows us the current
information about our map.
We have the coordinates of our
cursor, for example, and it also
shows us the map scale, the zoom
extent, the rotation and in the
corner we can see the coordinate
system that our map is in.
And so there you go, that's the
main layout of QGIS where to
access the different buttons and
what each window you can see is
used for.